=== Section 2(a): Proposal ===
When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from
doing anything, with a view to obtaining the assent of that other to such act or
abstinence, he is said to make a proposal:


=== Section 2(b): Promise ===
When the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, the
proposal is said to be accepted. A proposal, when accepted becomes a
promise:


=== Section 2(d): Consideration ===
When, at the desire of the promisor, the promisee or any other person has done
or abstained from doing, or does or abstains from doing, or promises to do or
to abstain from doing, something, such act or abstinence or promise is called a
consideration for the promise:

=== Section 2(e): Agreement ===
Every promise and every set of promises, forming the consideration for each
other, is an agreement:

=== Section 2(g): Void Agreement ===
An agreement not enforceable by law is said to be void:

=== Section 2(h): Contract ===
An agreement enforceable by law is a contract:

=== Section 10: What Agreements are Contracts ===
All agreements are contracts if they are made by the
free consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and
are not hereby expressly declared to be void.
Nothing herein contained shall affect any law in force in 1
[Pakistan], and not hereby
expressly repealed, by which any contract is required to be made in writing or in the presence of
witnesses, or any law relating to the registration of documents.

=== Section 11: Who is Competent to Contract ===
Every person is competent to contract who is of the age
of majority according to the law to which he is subject, and who is of sound mind, and is not
disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject.

=== Section 13: Consent Defined ===
Two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon the
same thing in the same sense.

=== Section 14: Free Consent Defined ===
Consent is said to be free when it is not caused by—
(1) coercion, as defined in section 15, or
(2) undue influence, as defined in section 16, or
(3) fraud, as defined in section 17, or
(4) misrepresentation, as defined in section 18, or
(5) mistake, subject to the provisions of sections 20, 21 and 22.
Consent is said to be so caused when it would not have been given but for the existence of
such coercion, undue influence, fraud, misrepresentation or mistake.

=== Section 15: Coercion Defined ===
“Coercion” is the committing, or threatening to commit, any act
forbidden by the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860) or the unlawful detaining, or threatening to
detain, any property, to the prejudice of any person whatever, with the intention of causing any
person to enter into an agreement.
Explanation.—It is immaterial whether the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860) is or is not in
force in the place where the coercion is employed.
Illustration
A, on board an English ship on the high seas, causes B to enter into an agreement by an act
amounting to criminal intimidation under the Pakistan of Penal Code (XLV of 1860).
A afterwards sues B for breach of contract at 1
[Karachi].
A has employed coercion, although his act is not an offence by the law of England, and
although section 506 of the Pakistan Penal Code was not in force at the time when or place where the
act was done.

=== Section 16: Undue Influence Defined ===
(1) A contract is said to be induced by “undue influence” where the relations subsisting between the parties are such that one of the parties is in a
position to dominate the will of the other and uses that position to obtain an unfair advantage over
the other.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing principle, a person is
deemed to be in a position to dominate the will of another___
(a) where he holds a real or apparent authority over the other or where he stands
in a fiduciary relation to the other: or (b) where he makes a contract with a person whose mental capacity is temporarily
or permanently affected by reason of age, illness, or mental or bodily distress.
(3) Where a person who is in a position to dominate the will of another, enters into a contract
with him, and the transaction appears, on the face of it or on the evidence adduced, to be unconscionable, the burden of proving that such contract was not induced by undue influence shall lie
upon the person in a position to dominate the will of the other.
Nothing in this sub-section shall affect the provisions of section 111 of the Evidence Act,
1872. (I of 1872).
Illustrations
(a) A having advanced money to his son, B, during his minority, upon B’s coming of age
obtains, by misuse of parental influence, a bond from B for a greater amount than the sum due in
respect of the advance. A employs undue influence.
(b) A, a man enfeebled by disease or age, is induced, by B’s influence over him as his medical
attendant, to agree to pay B an unreasonable sum for his professional services. B employs undue
influence.
(c) A, being in debt to B, the money-lender of his village, contracts a fresh loan on terms which
appear to be unconscionable. It lies on B to prove that the contract was not induced by undue
influence.
(d) A applies to a banker for a loan at a time when there is stringency in the money market. The
banker declines to make the loan except at an unusually high rate of interest. A accepts the loan on
these terms. This is a transaction in the ordinary course of business, and the contract is not induced
by undue influence.


=== Section 17: Fraud Defined ===
“Fraud” means and includes any of the following acts committed by a
party to a contract, or with his connivance, or by his agent, with intent to deceive another party
thereto or his agent, or to induce him to enter into the contract :
__
(1) the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not true, by one who does not believe
it to be true ;
(2) the active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge or belief of the fact;
(3) a promise made without any intention of performing it ;
(4) any other act fitted to deceive ;
(5) any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be fraudulent.
Explanation.—Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the willingness of a person to
enter into a contract is not fraud, unless the circumstances of the case are such that, regard being had
to them, it is the duty of the person keeping silence to speak, or unless his silence is, in itself,
equivalent to speech.
Illustrations
(a) A sells, by auction, to B, a horse which A knows to be unsound. A says
nothing to B about the horse’s unsoundness. This is not fraud in A.
(b) B is A’s daughter and has just come of age. Here, the relation between the
parties would make it A’s duty to tell B if the horse is unsound.
(c) B says to A—"If you do not deny it, I shall assume that the horse is sound.” A
says nothing. Here A’s silence is equivalent to speech.
(d) A and B, being traders, enter upon a contract. A has private information of a
change in prices which would affect B’s willingness to proceed with the
contract. A is not bound to inform B.

=== Section 18: Misrepresentation Defined ===
“Misrepresentation” means and includes—
(1) the positive assertion, in a manner not warranted by the information of the person making
it, of that which is not true, though he believes it to be true ;
(2) any breach of duty which, without an intent to deceive, gains an advantage to the person
committing it, or any one claiming under him, by misleading another to his prejudice or to the
prejudice of any one claiming under him ;
(3) causing, however innocently, a party to an agreement to make a mistake as to the
substance of the thing which is the subject of the agreement.

=== Section 19: Voidability of Agreements without Free Consent ===
When consent to an agreement is
caused by coercion, 1
[* *] fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement is a contract voidable at the
option of the party whose consent was so caused.
A party to a contract, whose consent was caused by fraud or misrepresentation, may, if he
thinks fit, insist that the contract shall be performed, and that he shall be put in the position in which
he would have been if the representations made had been true.
Exception.—If such consent was caused by misrepresentation or by silence, fraudulent within
the meaning of section 17, the contract, nevertheless, is not voidable, if the party whose consent was
so caused had the means of discovering the truth with ordinary diligence.
Explanation.—A fraud or misrepresentation which did not cause the consent to a contract of
the party on whom such fraud was practised, or to whom such misrepresentation was made, does not
render a contract voidable.
Illustrations
(a) A, intending to deceive B, falsely represents that five hundred maunds of
indigo are made annually at A’s factory, and thereby induces B to buy the
factory. The contract is voidable at the option of B.
(b) A, by a misrepresentation, leads B erroneously to believe that five hundred
maunds of indigo are made annually at A’s factory. B examines the accounts
of the factory, which show that only four hundred maunds of indigo have been
made. After this B buys the factory. The contract is not voidable on account of
A’s misrepresentation.
(c) A fraudulently informs B that A’s estate is free from incumbrance. B
thereupon buys the estate. The estate is subject to a mortgage. B may either
avoid the contract, or may insist on its being carried out and the mortgage-debt
redeemed.
(d) B, having discovered a vein of ore on the estate of A, adopts means to conceal,
and does conceal, the existence of the ore from A. Through A’s ignorance B is
enabled to buy the estate at an under-value. The contract is voidable at the
option of A.
(e) A is entitled to succeed to an estate at the death of B ; B dies : C, having
received intelligence of B’s death, prevents the intelligence reaching A, and
thus induces A to sell him his interest in the estate. The sale is voidable at the
option of A.

=== Section 23: Lawful Consideration and Object ===
The consideration or object
of an agreement is lawful, unless—it is forbidden by law; or
is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law ; or
is fraudulent ; or
involves or implies injury to the person or property of another; or the Court regards it as
immoral, or opposed to public policy.

=== Section 25: Agreement without Consideration Void — Exceptions ===
In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful.
Every agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful is void.
Illustrations
(a) A agrees to sell his house to B for 10,000 rupees. Here B’s promise to pay the
sum of 10,000 rupees is the consideration for A’s promise to sell the house,
and A’s promise to sell the house is the consideration for B’s promise to pay
the 10,000 rupees. These are lawful considerations.
(b) A promises to pay B 1,000 rupees at the end of six months; if C, who owes
that sum to B, fails to pay it. B promises to grant time to C accordingly. Here
the promise of each party is the consideration for the promise of the other
party and they are lawful considerations.
(c) A promises, for a certain sum paid to him by B, to make good to B the value
of his ship if it is wrecked on a certain voyage. Here A’s promise is the
consideration for B’s payment and B’s payment is the consideration for A’s
promise and these are lawful considerations.
(d) A promises to maintain B’s child and B promises to pay A 1,000 rupees yearly
for the purpose. Here the promise of each party is the consideration for the
promise of the other party. They are lawful considerations.
(e) A, B and C enter into an agreement for the division among them of gains
acquired, or to be acquired, by them by fraud. The agreement is void as its
object is unlawful.
(f) A promises to obtain for B an employment in the public service, and B
promises to pay 1,000 rupees to A. The agreement is void, as the consideration
for it is unlawful.
(g) A, being agent for a landed proprietor, agrees for money, without the
knowledge of his principal, to obtain for B a lease of land belonging to his
principal. The agreement between A and B is void, as it implies a fraud by
concealment by A, on his principal.
(h) A promises B to drop a prosecution which he has instituted against B for
robbery, and B promises to restore the value of the things taken. The
agreement is void, as its object is unlawful.
(i) A’s estate is sold for arrears of revenue under the provisions of an Act of the
Legislature, by which the defaulter is prohibited from purchasing the estate. B,
upon an understanding with A, becomes the purchaser, and agrees to convey
the estate to A upon receiving from him the price which B has paid. The
agreement is void, as it renders the transaction, in effect, a purchase by the
defaulter, and would so defeat the object of the law.
(j) A, who is B’s mukhtar, promises to exercise his influence, as such, with B in
favour of C, and C promises to pay 1,000 rupees to A. The agreement is void,
because it is immoral.
(k) A agrees to let her daughter to hire to B for concubinage. The agreement is
void, because it is immoral, though the letting may not be punishable under
the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860).

=== Section 56: Agreement to do Impossible Act ===
 An agreement to do an act impossible in itself is void.
Contract to do act afterwards becoming impossible or unlawful. A contract to do an act
which, after the contract is made, becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the
promisor could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful.
Compensation for loss through non-performance of act known to be impossible or
unlawful. Where one person has promised to do something which he knew, or, with reasonable
diligence, might have known, and which the promisee did not know to be impossible or unlawful,
such promisor must make compensation to such promisee for any loss which such promisee sustains
through the non-performance of the promise.
Illustrations
(a) A agrees with B to discover treasure by magic. The agreement is void.
(b) A and B contract to marry each other. Before the time fixed for the marriage,
A goes mad. The contract becomes void.
(c) A contracts to marry B, being already married to C, and being forbidden by
the law to which he is subject to practise polygamy. A must make compensation to B for the loss caused to her by the non-performance of his
promise.
(d) A contracts to take in cargo for B at a foreign port. A’s Government
afterwards declares war against the country in which the port is situated. The
contract becomes void when war is declared.
(e) A contracts to act at a theatre for six months in consideration of a sum, paid in
advance by B. On several occasions A is too ill to act. The contract to act on
those occasions becomes void.

=== Section 73: Compensation for Breach of Contract ===
When a contract has
been broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the contract, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him thereby, which naturally arose
in the usual course of things from such breach, or which the parties knew, when they made the
contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it.
Such compensation is not to be given for any remote and in direct loss or damage sustained
by reason of the breach.
Compensation for failure to discharge obligation resembling those created by contract.
When an obligation resembling those created by contract has been incurred and has not been
discharged, any person injured by the failure to discharge it is entitled to receive the same compensation from the party in default, as if such person had contracted to discharge it and had broken his
contract.
Explanation.—In estimating the loss or damage arising from a breach of contract, the means
which existed of remedying the inconvenience caused by the non-performance of the contract must
be taken into account.
Illustrations
(a) A contracts to sell and deliver 50 maunds of saltpetre to B, at a certain price to
be paid on delivery. A breaks his promise. B is entitled to receive from A, by
way of compensation, the sum, if any, by which the contract price falls short
of the price for which B might have obtained 50 maunds of saltpetre of like
quality at the time when the saltpetre ought to have been delivered.
(b) A hires B’s ship to go to l
[Karachi], and there take on board, on the first of
January, a cargo which A is to provide and to bring it to 1
[Chittagong], the freight
to be paid when earned. B’s ship does not go to l
[Karachi], but A has
opportunities of procuring suitable conveyance or the cargo upon terms as
advantageous as those on which he had chartered the ship. A avails himself of
those opportunities, but is put to trouble and expense in doing so. A is entitled to
receive compensation from B in respect of such trouble and expense.
(c) A contracts to buy of B, at a stated price, 50 maunds of rice, no time being fixed
for delivery. A afterwards informs B that he will not accept the rice if tendered to
him. B is entitled to receive from A, by way of compensation, the amount, if any,
by which the contract price exceeds that which B can obtain for the rice at the
time when A informs B that he will not accept it.
(d) A contracts to buy B’s ship for 60,000 rupees, but breaks his promise. A must pay
to B, by way of compensation, the excess, if any, of the contract price over the
price which B can obtain for the ship at the time of the breach of promise.
(e) A, the owner of a boat, contracts with B to take a cargo of jute to 1
[Mymensingh],
for sale at that place, starting on a specified day. The boat owing to some
avoidable cause, does not start at the time appointed, whereby the arrival of the
cargo at 1
[Mymensingh] is delayed beyond the time when it would have arrived if
the boat had sailed according to the contract. After that date, and before the arrival
of the cargo, the price of jute falls. The measure of the compensation payable to B
by A is the difference between the price which B could have obtained for the
cargo at 1
[Mymensingh] at the time when it would have arrived if forwarded in
due course, and its market price at the time when it actually arrived.
(f) A contracts to repair B’s house in a certain manner, and receives payment in
advance. A repairs the house, but not according to contract. B is entitled to
recover from A the cost of making the repairs conform to the contract.
(g) A contracts to let his ship to B for a year, from the first of January, for a certain
price. Freights rise, and, on the first of January, the hire obtainable for the ship is
higher than the contract price. A breaks his promise. He must pay to B, by way of
compensation, a sum equal to the difference between the contract price and the
price for which B could hire a similar ship for a year on and from the first of
January.
(h) A contracts to supply B with a certain quantity of iron at a fixed price, being a
higher price than that for which A could procure and deliver the iron. B
wrongfully refuses to receive the iron. B must pay to A, by way of compensation,
the difference between the contract price of the iron and the sum for which A
could have obtained and delivered it.
(i) A delivers to B, a common carrier, a machine, to be conveyed, without delay, to
A’s mill informing B that his mill is stopped for want of the machine. B
unreasonably delays the delivery of the machine, and A, in consequence, loses a
profitable contract with the Government. A is entitled to receive from B, by way
of compensation, the average amount of profit which would have been made by
the working of the mill during the time that delivery of it was delayed, but not the
loss sustained through the loss of the Government contract.
(j) A, having contracted with B to supply B with 1,000 tons of iron at 100 rupees a
ton, to be delivered at a stated time, contracts with C for the purchase of 1,000
tons of iron at 80 rupees a ton, telling C that he does so for the purpose of
performing his contract with B. C fails to perform his contract with A, who
cannot procure other iron, and B, in consequence, rescinds the contract. C must
pay to A 20,000 rupees, being the profit which A would have made by the
performance of his contract with B.
(k) A contracts with B to make and deliver to B, by a fixed day, for a specified price,
a certain piece of machinery. A does not deliver the piece of machinery at the
time specified, and, in consequence of this, B is obliged to procure another at a
higher price than that which he was to have paid to A, and is prevented from
performing a contract which B had made with a third person at the time of his
contract with A (but which had not been then communicated to A), and is
compelled to make compensation for breach of that contract. A must pay to B by
way of compensation, the difference between the contract price of the piece of
machinery and the sum paid by B for another, but not the sum paid by B to the
third person by way of compensation.
(l) A, a builder, contracts to erect and finish a house by the first of January, in
order that B may give possession of it at that time to C, to whom B has contracted to let it. A is informed of the contract between B and C. A builds the
house so badly that, before the first of January, if falls down and has to be
rebuilt by B, who, in consequence, loses the rent which he was to have
received from C, and is obliged to make compensation to C for the breach of
his contract. A must make compensation to B for the cost of rebuilding the
house, for the rent lost, and for the compensation made to C.
(m) A sells certain merchandise to B, warranting it to be of a particular quality,
and B, in reliance upon this warranty, sells it to C with a similar warranty. The
goods prove to be not according to the warranty, and B becomes liable to pay
C a sum of money by way of compensation. B is entitled to be reimbursed this
sum by A.
(n) A contracts to pay a sum of money to B on a day specified. A does not pay the
money on that day; B, in consequence of not receiving the money on that day,
is unable to pay his debts, and is totally ruined. A is not liable to make good to
B anything except the principal sum he contracted to pay, together with
interest up to the day of payment.
(o) A contracts to deliver 50 maunds of saltpeter to B on the first of January, at a
certain price. B afterwards, before the first of January, contracts to sell the saltpeter to C at a price higher than the market price of the first of January. A
breaks his promise. In estimating the compensation payable by A to B, the
market price of the first of January, and not the profit which would have arisen
to B from the sale to C, is to be taken into account.
(p) A contracts to sell and deliver 500 bales of cotton to B on a fixed day, A
knows nothing of B’s mode of conducting his business. A breaks his promise,
and B, having no cotton, is obliged to close his mill. A is not responsible to B
for the loss caused to B by the closing of the mill.
(q) A contacts to sell and deliver to B, on the first of January, certain cloth, which
B intends to manufacture into caps of a particular kind, for which there is no
demand, except at that season. The cloth is not delivered till after the
appointed time, and too late to be used that year in making caps. B is entitled
to receive from A, by way of compensation, the difference between the
contract price of the cloth and its market price at the time of delivery, but not
the profits which he expected to obtain by making caps, nor the expenses
which he has been put to in making preparation for the manufacture.
(r) A, a ship-owner, contracts with B to convey him from l
[Karachi] to Sydney in
A’s ship, sailing on the first of January, and B pays to A, by way of deposit,
one-half of his passage-money. The ship does not sail on the first of January,
and B, after being, in consequence, detained in l
[Karachi] for some time, and
thereby put to some expense, proceeds to Sydney in another vessel, and, in
consequence, arriving too late in Sydney, loses a sum of money. A is liable to
repay to B his deposit, with interest, and the expense to which he is put by his
detention in 1
[Karachi] and the excess, if any, of the passage-money paid for
the second ship over that agreed upon for the first, but not the sum of money
which B lost by, arrivaing in Sydney too late.

=== Section 74: Compensation where Penalty Stipulated ===
74. Compensation for breach of contract where penalty stipulated for. 2
[When a contract
has been broken, if a sum is named in the contract as the amount to be paid in case of such breach, or
if the contract contains any other stipulation by way of penalty, the party complaining of the breach
is entitled, whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused thereby, to receive
from the party who has broken the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount so
named or, as the case may be, the penalty stipulated for.
Explanation.—A stipulation for increased interest from the date of default may be a
stipulation by way of penalty.]
Exception.—When any person enters into any bail-bond, recognizance or other instrument of the
same nature, or, under the provisions of any law, or under the orders of the 3
[Federal Government] or
of any 4
[Provincial Government], gives any bond for the performance of any public duty or act in
which the public are interested, he shall be liable, upon breach of the condition of any such
instrument, to pay the whole sum mentioned therein.
Explanation.—A person who enters into a contract with Government does not necessarily
thereby undertake any public duty, or promise to do an act in which the public are interested.
Illustrations
(a) A contracts with B to pay B Rs. 1,000, if he fails to pay B Rs. 500 on a given
day. A fails to pay B Rs. 500 on that day. B is entitled to recover from A such
compensation, not exceeding Rs. 1, 000, as the Court considers reasonable.
(b) A contracts with B that, if A practises as a surgeon within 1
[Peshawar], he will
pay B Rs. 5,000. A practises as a surgeon in 1
[Peshawar]. B is entitled to such
compensation, not exceeding Rs. 5,000 as the Court considers reasonable.
(c) A gives a recognizance binding him in a penalty of Rs. 500 to appear in Court
on a certain day. He forfeits his recognizance. He is liable to pay the whole
penalty.
2
[(d) A gives B a bond for the repayment of Rs. 1,000 with interest at 12 per cent, at
the end of six months, with a stipulation that in case of default, interest shall
be payable at the rate of 75 per cent. from the date of default. This is a
stipulation by way of penalty, and B is only entitled to recover from A such
compensation as the Court considers reasonable.
(e) A, who owes money to B, a money-lender, undertakes to repay him by
delivering to him 10 maunds of grain on a certain date, and stipulates that, in
the event of his not delivering the stipulated amount by the stipulated date, he
shall be liable to deliver 20 maunds. This is a stipulation by way of penalty,
and B is only entitled to reasonable compensation in case of breach.
(f) A undertake to repay B a loan of Rs. 1,000 by five equal monthly installments
with a stipulation that, in default of payment of any installment, the whole
shall become due. This stipulation is not by way of penalty, and the contract
may be enforced according to its terms.
(g) A borrows Rs. 100 from B and gives him a bond for Rs. 200 payable by five
yearly instalments of Rs. 40, with a stipulation that, in default of payment of
any instalment, the whole shall become due. This a stipulation by way of
penalty.]