=== Article 1: Short Title and Commencement ===
(1) This order may be called the Qanun-eShahadat. 1984.
(2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan and applies to all judicial proceedings in or before
any Court, including a Court Martial, a Tribunal or other authority exercising judicial or
quasi judicial powers or Jurisdiction, but does not apply to proceedings before an
arbitrator.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

=== Article 2: Definitions ===
(1) In this Order, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context—
(a) "Court" includes ail Judges and Magistrates, and all persons, except arbitrators, legally
authorised to take evidence;
(b) "Document" means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means
of letters, figures or
marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used,
for the purpose recording that matter;
A writing is a document;
Words printed, lithographed or photographed are documents ;
A map or plan Is a document;
An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document ;
A caricature is a document.
(c) "Evidence" includes;
(i) all statements which the Court permits or requires be made before it by witnesses, m
relation to matters of fact under inquiry ; such statements are called oral evidence ; and
(ii) all documents produced for the inspection of the Court; such documents are called
documentary evidence ;
(d) "fact" includes—
(i) anything, state of things, or relation of things capable .of being perceived by the senses
and
(ii) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.
Illustrations
(a) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain place, is a fact.
(b) That a man heard or saw something. Is a fact.
(c) That a man said certain words is a fact.
(d) That a man holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good faith or
fraudulently, or uses a particular word in a particular sense or is or was at a specified time
conscious of a particular sensation is a fact.
(e) That a man has a certain reputation is a fact.
(2) One fact is said to be relevant to another when the one is connected with the other in
any of the ways referred to in the provisions of the Order relating to the relevancy of facts.
(3) The expression "facts in issue" includes any fact from which, either by itself or in
connection with other facts the existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any right,
liability or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily follows.
Explanation: Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being in force relating
to civil procedure, any Court records on issue of fact, the fact to be asserted or denied in
the answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
Illustrations
A is accused of the murder of B.
At his trial the following facts may be in issue:—
that A caused B's death ;
that A had intended to cause B's death ;
that A had received grave sudden provocation from B ;
that A, at the time of doing the act which caused B's death, was by reason of
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing its nature.
(4) A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court
either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought,
under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.
(5) A fact is said to be disproved when after considering the matters before it, the Court
either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence so probable that a
prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the
supposition that it does not exist.
(6) A fact is said not to be proved when it is neither proved nor disproved.
(7) Whenever it is provided by this Order that the Court may presume a fact, it may either
regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved, or may call for proof of it.
(8) Whenever it is directed by this Order that the Court shall presume a fact, it shall regard
such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved.
(9) When one fact is declared by the Order to be conclusive proof of another, the Court
shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to
be given for the purpose of disproving it.

=== Article 17: Proof of Facts by Oral Evidence ===
(1) The competence of a person to testify,
and the number of witnesses required in any case shall be determined in accordance With
the injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah:"
(2) Unless otherwise provided in any law relating to the enforcement of Hudood or any
other special law: —
(a) in matters pertaining to financial or future obligations, if reduced to writing, the
instrument shall be attested by two men or one man and two women, so that one may
remind the other, if necessary, and evidence shall be led accordingly ; and
(b) in all other matters, the Court may accept, or act on the testimony of one man or one
woman or such other evidence as the circumstances of the case may warrant. 

=== Article 71: Proof of Signature and Handwriting ===
 Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever be direct,
that is to say—
If it refers to a fact, which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he
saw it;
If it refers to a fact, which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says
he heard it;
If it refers to a fact, which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it
must be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that
manner;
If it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the
evidence of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treaties commonly offered for sale
and the grounds on which such opinions are held, maybe proved by the production of
such treaties if the author is dead, or cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving
evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay or expense which
the Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided further that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any material
thing other than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of such
material thing for its inspection:
Provided further that, if a witness is dead, or can not be found or has become incapable of
giving evidence, or his attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or
expense which under the circumstances of the case the Court regards as unreasonable, a
party shall have the right to produce, “shahada ala al-shahadah” by which a witness can
appoint two witnesses to depose on his behalf, except in the case of Hudood. 

=== Article 117: Burden of Proof ===
(1) Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal
right or liability dependent On the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that
those facts exist.
(2) When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of
proof lies on that person.
Illustrations
(a) A desired a Court to give Judgment that B shall be punished for a crime which A says
B has committee.
A must prove that B has committed the crime.
(b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to certain land in the possession
of B by reason of facts, which he asserts, and which B denies to be true.
A must prove the existence of those facts. 

=== Article 118: On Whom Burden of Proof Lies ===
The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on
that person who would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and which, as A asserts was left to A by
the will of C, B's father.
If no evidence were given on either side, B would be entitled to retain his possession.
Therefore the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond.
The execution of the bond is admitted, but B says that it was obtained by fraud, which A
denies.
lf no evidence were given on either aide, A would succeed as the bond is not disputed and
the fraud is not proved.
Therefore the burden, of proof is on B. 

=== Article 119: Burden of Proof as to Particular Fact ===
 The burden of proof as to any particular fact
lies on that person who wishes the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided
by any law that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person.
Illustrations
(a) A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court to believe that B admitted the theft, to
C. A must prove the admission.
(b) B wishes the Court to believe that at the time in question, he was elsewhere. He must
prove it. 

=== Article 121: Burden of Proving Fact Especially Within Knowledge ===
When a
person is accused of any offence the burden of proving the existence of circumstances
bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the Pakistan Penal Code (Act
XLV of 1860), or within any special exception or proviso contained in any other part of the
same Code, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall presume
the absence of such circumstances.
Illustrations
(a) “A” accused of murder, alleges that by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not
know the nature of the act.
The burden of proof is on A.
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was deprived
of the power of self-control.
The burden of proof is on A.
(c) Section 325 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860) provides that whoever,
except in the case provided for by Section 335 voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall be
subject to certain punishments.
A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt under Section 325.
The burden of proving the circumstances bringing the case under Section 336 lies on A

=== Article 129: Estoppel ===
 The Court may presume the
existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the
common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business, in
their relation to the facts of the particular case.
Illustrations
The Court may presume—
(a) that a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is either the thief
or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his
possession ;
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material
particulars ;
(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good
consideration ;
(d) that a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a period
shorter than that within which such things or states of things usually cease to exist, is still
in existence ;
(e) that judicial and official acts have been regularly performed ;
(f) that the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) that evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be unfavourable
to the person who withholds it ;
(h) that, if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled to answer by
law, the answer, if given, would be unfavourable to him
(i) that when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the
obligation has been discharged.
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering whether
such maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it;
as to illustration (a) : a shopkeeper has in his till marked rupee soon after it was stolen,
and cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually receiving rupees
in the course of his business ;
as to illustration (a) : A. person of the highest character, is tried for causing a man's death
by an act of negligence in arranging certain machinery, B, a person of equally good
character, who also took part in the arrangement, describes precisely what was
done, and admits and explains the common carelessness of A and himself ;
as to illustration (b) : A crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C. three of the
criminals, are captured on the shop and kept apart from each other. Each gives an
account of the crime implicating D and the accounts corroborate each other in such a
manner as to render previous concert highly improbable;
as to illustration (c) : A. the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business. B; the
acceptor, was a young and ignorant person, completely under A's influence;
as to illustration (d) : It is proved that a river ran in a certain course five years ago. But it is
known that there have been floods since that time which might change its course ;
as to illustration (e): a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was performed
under exceptional circumstances ;
as to illustration (f): the question is, whether a letter was received. It is shown to have
been posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by disturbances;
as to illustration (g) : a man refuses to produce a document which would bear on a
contract of small importance on which he is sued. but which might also injure the
feelings and reputation of his family;
as to illustration (h) : a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled by law
to answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters unconnected with
the matter in relation to which it is asked ;
as to illustration (i) : a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the circumstances of the
case are such that he may have stolen it. 

=== Article 150: Who May Testify ===
The Court may, in its discretion, permit the
person who calls a witness to put any questions to him, which might be put in crossexamination by the adverse party. 

=== Article 151: Dumb Witnesses ===
 The credit of a witness may be impeached in the
following ways by the adverse party or with the consent of the Court, by the party who
calls him:
(1) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of the witness,
believe him to be un-worthy of credit;
(2) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a bribe, or has
received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence ;
(3) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence which is liable
to be contradicted ;
(4) when a man is prosecuted for rape or an attempt to ravish, it may be shown that the
prosecutrix was of generally immoral character.
Explanation: A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may not, upon
his examination-in-chief, give reason for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in
cross examination, and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted, though, if
they are false, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B. C says that A delivered the
goods to B.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he had not
delivered the goods to B.
The evidence is admissible.
(b) “A” if indicated for the murder of B.
C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the wound of which he died.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said that the wound was not
given by A or in his presence,
The evidence is admissible. 

=== Article 152: Parties to Civil Suit and Their Spouses — Competency ===
When a
witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any relevant fact, he may be
questioned as to any other circumstances which he observed at or near to the time or
place at which such relevant fact occurred if the Court is of opinion that such
circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the relevant
fact which he testifies.
Illustrations
A, an accomplice, gives an account of robbery in which he took part He describes various
incidents unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the place
where it was committed.
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to corroborate his evidence as
to the robbery itself. 
